---
layout: post
title: "Degenerative Joint Disease and CrossFit"
date: 2017-03-26
categories: crossfit
---
I firmly believe that CrossFit is great for exposing weaknesses...and when done correctly CrossFit will fix them.

Back in October 2011, about a year after I started CrossFit, my left knee started to hurt badly. After almost a year of pushing myself to limits I have not explored before, I hit my first sign of weakness. So I visited a doctor and had a X-ray done and found that I have "[degenerative joint disease](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Osteoarthritis){:target="_blank"}" in my knee. Despite being called a "disease", all this meant for me was that the cartilage in my joint is thinner than normal. The doctor's advice was to stop CrossFit.  After all the jumping, running, and squats, I thought age has finally taken over and this knee pain was going to be the new normal. After a month my knee was feeling better, but it would feel 90% better on Monday, and by Friday it would start to hurt again...then I would take the weekend off from workouts and repeat. I really did not want to stop CrossFit.

At first I thought it was my squat technique was causing the problem so I started to scale all my squat weights. If there were box jumps in the workout I would step up and down (avoiding jumping). This went on for months. Earlier that April I got my CrossFit Level 1 Certification then started exploring the other courses CrossFit had to offer. One of them was CrossFit Endurance. At first, I thought it was about how to go hard and fast in workouts, but after I received the course materials I learned it was about running. I almost cancelled as I hate running, and i'm not very good at it. But I took the course anyway and learned that I was a 'heal striker' and this was the root cause of my knee pain. After that weekend in August 2012, CrossFit Endurance fixed my knee pain forever by fixing my running posture from heal striking. I'm still not at good running, but I'm squatting 100 lbs more than when I had the pain. I also started to do box jumps again, and have since had not experience any knee pain of any kind.

My second exposure to weakness came February 2013. After many more months of grueling workouts and taking myself to limits not explored before, I experienced pain in my left leg and lower back. It was so bad that I could not walk, stand for long periods, sit for long periods, or even sleep. I visited a Chiropractor and had a X-ray done, and was exposed to "degenerative joint disease" between my L4 and L5 in my lower back which led to disk herniation. The cartilage looked really thin. Again, I thought "Oh, shit...my CrossFit days are over". I still went to the gym, but for a while did not row, no deadlifts, and basically scaled everything again. After a month of therapy at the Chiropractor my pain had subsided but I was slowly trying to rebuild strength being strict in my technique. At that time my deadlift 1 rep max was 255, two years later I pulled 315 (My height: 5' 6", my weight 160lbs).

As of this post I've recovered from my third exposure to weakness with pain experience in my left shoulder from a year ago. I'm sure that it was the numerous attempts to power snatch 135 and do chest to bar pull-ups that lead to this, but i'm also sure it was my continuous drive to do more that lead to this problem. This time I did not see a doctor. I do recall not having a lot of mobility in the left shoulder, and tried a lot of stretching techniques and used the lacrosse ball and foam roller to massage that area of the shoulder. Then I saw a video of CrossFit Games Athlete Camille Leblanc-Bazinet on [Instagram](https://www.instagram.com/p/BEb3Z__Fjhx/){:target="_blank"} performing a shoulder stretch that I tried and my shoulder started to feel better. Then I started to bench press (that seemed to hit the same shoulder area), and my left shoulder started getting stronger. Today, i'm happy snatching no more than 115 and just started doing toes-to-bars and kipping pull-ups again.

So, the moral of this story is not to give up. I personally think anyone can do CrossFit and that everyone can benefit from it. But you need to be patient. All three pain experiences has led me to consider stopping CrossFit, but I keep coming back, learn from mistakes and fix them, and just simply get better than yesterday.
